---
title: Br. Xavier Werneth 
date : 2016-10-14
contentful:
  contentype: interview
  entry_id : 5IuMeTaNSokYgAYaGuUyCg 
exists : br-xavier-werneth 
template : interviewentry.html 
--- 
Br. Xavier Werneth (2)
[00:00:00] 
So how did it happen that you became such a historian for the brothers? I guess almost by accident. I don't know. Nobody ever asked me to do that. I was never an assignment. I never had time off to work on it, but I really got interested. Ceramic my very first year here in Baton Rouge 1965.
It's my first year of teaching and I was assigned the yearbook and I was told oh it's by the way, it's the 75th Anniversary Catholic High School. So you gotta do something about this. Truth Catholic High School in the yearbook. And so I started looking up some of the history of Catholic High School.
That was my first sort of introduction into the history of the schools and fathers and then when I became for eventual in [00:01:00] 1982 started putting a lot of the material in the files on data processing and then that got me interested and then the lives of the brothers we call from the cross. To you, it was a little paragraph of so about each brother who died from the problems and I'd read these and it was just full of what I call pies platitudes.
This was a good and holy man, and I felt you could take these names and just interchange them and it would make any difference at all. So I said, well, you know, we got to do better. I said what makes this brother unique I mean, so I started writing the lives of the brothers are rear. The ones that it done have put a little picture of them and then where they were born when they entered what school I went to how they met the brothers what their assignments were but then I wanted to add what made this brother who we was what's individual about this brother.
So I would add those [00:02:00] types of things like if he had it some people got upset because like if he had a drinking problem I said he overcame a drinking problem. That was quite significant in his life that this guy had a problem and he overcame it. Some people didn't like that. Thought. I was just like his to honest that we ought only say the good things but I thought that was a good thing.
You know, he had a fiery temper that he kept in check. I thought I was good. So I rewrote all the lives of our brothers and then kept adding to it so that you saw the floor mats in a Loosely formed now, so every time a brother died, I had to so I've been doing that since 1982 when I was in Rome II didn't keep up with it.
But when I came back I was asked to update it. And then when we join the three provinces and United States, I was asked to incorporate all of the brothers from New England. Well, that was a big job that took over a year to do that. [00:03:00] And then while I was in Rome brother Bernie who was provincial.
New Orleans Province asked me if I would write. The history of the New Orleans Province since 1847 when brothers first came to the United States and finish it out for the Susquehanna Centennial anniversary. So I said sure and I was in Rome's I had a lot of time to do it and I had access to all the files in Rome which was very helpful and then when I came back.
It took a couple of years to do this when I came back I had access to the files in our provincial office. And so soda by default. I became the historian for the problems published that book and then I was at Stanislaus when I polish it and they asked me if I would publish a book the history of Stanislaus for its hundred and fiftieth anniversary, [00:04:00] and this was before Katrina.
So they still have archives there. So I spent a lot of time working on that came out a nice book was like a coffee table type book of pictorial history. I'm glad I did it because they lost all their archives and Katrina that now that's the only history that basically that they have so so it was fun.
I got interested in it and then I started I do a lot of family history. That's one of my hobbies and I saw like to do that kind of research reading old newspapers. And as I read some of the old newspapers in Baton Rouge and mobile and New Orleans are available. Now some of them online I'd say a story about the brothers are about the school and so I would just make a copy or either download it digitally and so that was interesting.
There was a question you had. Your Pub the brother who [00:05:00] was captured during the Confederate as conscripted as a confederate soldier. That was brother Hugh Hamill. who was born in Canada on an Acosta Island and he was stationed in Mobile when the Civil War broke out and he was very outgoing very.
spoke a lot against slavery and against the South. And all of that so sort of dangerous for him to be mobile. So the provincial sending to one of our houses in Kentucky, which was a neutral State along the way there in Chattanooga, Tennessee. He was stopped and asked for his papers and all that well, He didn't have sufficient papers.
So they conscripted him into the Confederate Army. But when I was in Rome, I'd look. His file enrollment it said he served in the Union Army. I said that doesn't sound [00:06:00] right. So I had the occasion to go to the national archives in Washington DC because I used to have meetings there. So I planned a day in Washington DC.
So I looked up his military record in Washington and sure enough. He he was conscripted into the Confederate Army and he served with the. Artillery now, what they would do is they would have somebody holding a gun on these guys during the battle. So they wouldn't lower the guns and shoot the Confederate soldiers that they shoot over them into the Yankee soldiers.
So they serve three years in the Confederate Army neera in Alabama, and then he when the war was over and he was. He rejoined the brothers and he was worked at st. Stanislaus. He was never a teacher. He was like a janitor sort of and feisty character. Like if people left things around on The [00:07:00] Gallery at st.
Stanislaus to just sweep them away. So very interesting character brother Hugh Hamill was his name. He changed his name. I came back to thank you became brother author. interesting story, so I just sort of fell into his. Trailer Brothers. I liked it and I like to write so the two things just fit well together so like to do research in the library, no papers and things like that.
What is your process for writing about a deceased brother brother like brothers in the lives of children? Feel some of them? I know but the process that I'll use is usually sent an email. Into the provincial office asking for a copy of the brothers personnel file, which will tell me when he joined when he was born.
His parents were where he went to [00:08:00] school where he got his college degree. So I get all that information and then sometimes I'm asked to write the obituary article. So what I'll do for that is a go back once I say who is siblings. See if some of them have already died. Then I'll find their obituary and whatever paper that appeared because it gives a lot of the relationships.
So then I'll start working on individual weary article that we can publish in the paper. But then for the lives of Brothers, it's very short. It's just they're all over that one page. So I'll condense it and it's got to fit. I'll get a picture of them and then I'll write a little bit about where he was born.
Or when he died how he met the brothers may be what motivated him to join but some of. Big assignments were whether he was a teacher or a gardener or missionary and then in the last paragraph. I usually write a little bit about his [00:09:00] character. What kind of person was he something that made him unique.
How is he different from other people things like that? So that's sort of the process. I will use when I keep revising it. And so I'll type up. One page sometimes if I didn't know the brother well, like some of the ones in New England, I'll write people I know up there until ask him tell me something about this brother or I'll get the booklet from his funeral mass and that often has ideas in it and I'll start putting together.
Condensing it and then say that you know just say well, what's what what really stands out? That's pretty much the process. I'll use and before I publish it. I send it out people who know them. I'll get brother rate proofread it
things like that. So, I guess since you've [00:10:00] traveled so much like internationally and lived in different countries. What's up? Your view on the American news like kindergarten is well when I was in Rome, it was hard to get good American use they have the voice of America which was horrible. It was just pure propaganda.
I mean it was terrible and so I would look around and I ended up will often times I go to the BBC the British news was in terms of work. News was very very good from coming from America. The the best Channel. I found us radio station was the Christian Science monitor out of Boston. It was very good.
So I listened to that a lot. And then before I left Rome CNN started broadcasting and also CVS you get the in the morning in Rome you get the evening. From the previous night. [00:11:00] So I followed that sometimes on television and then sometimes I would listen to the news and French or Italian. So to get their view on things, which is very different.
Like I was in Rome during the first Iraqi War all the. They figured the war is all about oil. That's why we went there there penny. So you get different viewpoints. So but it was very difficult to get good news from America. It's biased but so is it from Italy Italy? They're much more open. About it.
They'll call it the Democratic Channel. This channel each party has its own station and you know, you're going to get that viewpoint. There's here. They don't tell you that but it's pretty obvious after a while that they're representing. Whoever their sponsors [00:12:00] are. Since your name was to share what have been some of your favorite books to teach.
I always. There's a raw right now. We're doing a lesson before dying. I don't know if Jacob did you hide it? That was my favorite book from that year? Yes. It's some of the same thing. Since the Kill a Mockingbird and put his presented from a totally different view point from black man, who is a teacher and he's used and he is not respected because simply because of his race and when he talks the white people he has to hold this is not keep his eyes down and things like that.
They can't let him know. He's intelligent. Presenting part Allah, so it's some very subtle things and it's written by Ernest Gaines is from Louisiana from the New Roads area and he brings in a lot of the very issues that we're still striving. To overcome in our society today [00:13:00] Baton Rouge with the police and all that Justice systems a lot of good topics there and Ernest Gaines goes into it and gaps and talks about a lot of the issues that have pretty much taboo now President Obama tried to talk about the.
Male and the African-American family people didn't want to hear about that. Especially the blacks will enter his Gates talks about that, you know say talks about a lot of issues that are relevant to us today, even though the story set in the 1940s is still makes a lot of sense. students like. 1984 it's not one of my favorites but right now with what's happening in our country with alternative facts and all that all these books flew off the shelf Amazon doesn't have anymore everybody read them teen 84.
So we're going to be teaching that in a few weeks have been interesting to see how that goes. [00:14:00] But my. I think is like Les Miserables and lesson before
dying. So could you share a story about an experience and a different country that you think others might find embarrassing or weird others my example. People that haven't haven't gone to that country. Oh.
You come tell story to other brothers that have somewhat embarrassed. Not that it should be weird just to yeah, it was like I was in a. Here all right there at the table and this brother sitting on my rights talking the whole time. Maybe just ever shut up. Well after the meal, I'm outside of walking with another brother from Indiana and he says oh you and brother so-and-so had her real good conversation, and I said, no, not really.
I don't understand Tom Hill. [00:15:00] I thought he was talking to me and tell me who the brother said. He was talking to you in English. Well, I didn't. I already said it was their English is so different from our English. It's the same like when I was in Madagascar, they asked me to go to an English class and I did and they wanted me to speak English to the students and I did and his girl there.
She she's getting angry and she says why don't you speak English correctly? He's telling me. App. Well, I didn't want to embarrass her I said well, I guess it's because I'm speaking American English, but their teacher had never been to an English-speaking country and their teacher mispronounced a lot of the words.
And so the students couldn't really understand my English, which was correct, but they. No it and they were going [00:16:00] out with their teacher caught up. So that was sort of embarrassing. Another time with the language and Uganda and Gulu where the brother was teaching brother choked when was teaching there in the Seminary and we went to mass in the morning.
The seminarians were saying that beautiful saying well in practice afterwards. I told Brother Elliot I said, I really enjoyed the singing of a chole that's their native language. He looks at me says No, they were singing in English could have fooled me. It sounded like a Joey so it's different English and then.
and I thought about it, you know. In India English is maybe their second third language. Tom will handy is the main language in the south is Tamil and then they have maybe 50 [00:17:00] different languages English is not the primary language, but there are more people that speak English and India than there are in England.
Something to think about okay there. It's quite different from ours the pronunciation. The inflection. Sometimes language can be embarrassing.
One example with the language and where you don't fully understand I was embarrassing. Answer because the attitude of French when you don't pronounce things correctly using the wrong pronoun, and so the post office trying to buy stamps and the clerk there young lady. She wanted to embarrass me and pretended that she didn't understand what I was saying.
Well The Man Behind. I was getting agitated because she was holding up the line and he cursed her out in French and said [00:18:00] Jimmy what he wants, you know, damn. Well, what do you want? And so but that's French. Okay, they'll laugh at you once I wanted to get some panel shulk alive. It said Pam du Chocolat I use the wrong preposition in the lady starts laughing, you know, that would never happen.
Italy when you miss make mistakes in Italian, they tell you to roll with it much friendlier people, but the French really value their language, there's only one way to pronounce things according to them. That's the French way and they often make mistakes when they try to speak English like I heard on the news when I was there at the mall.
The death of Sammy David didn't ring a bell and then they showed his picture on TV Sammy Davis Sammy Davis jr. But they pronounce the name. So I mean David and I had no idea who they were talking about [00:19:00] Michel Dukakis and you know, they were told us a tea instead of a tie. So so yeah language can be embarrassing sometimes when you make mistakes, so you just have to swallow your pride.
You want to learn how to speak the language? We did most of our work in French. I had to learn French. I didn't know how to speak French when I was elected. But it Neva though we're living in that Italy all. Work was in French like a little difficult. So you mean a brother? Have you ever doubted your faith or have you ever had to deal with it and I guess us being seniors and fixing to graduate and our life really fixing to kick off if we are there ever doubt our faith.
You think we should deal with it? Don't Panic doubts are good. It's nothing to be afraid of [00:20:00] people who never doubt probably don't have a guard keep Faith. You just accept everything. It's throwing out there means you really haven't thought about it. So I think doubts or natural. faith. It's a gift and you have to pray for it and accept it, you know so ask for Faith and one of the things I learned early on is when you have gone through a period of Doubt like that.
You don't make decisions don't make decision based on now. Let's say you wait and it'll pass and there are times. Or you know, you just maybe get angry with God, you know, what a good people suffer things like that. These are pretty serious questions where there are no simple answers that that test our faith.
So yeah, we all have doubts at Tufts and doubts about. [00:21:00] My vocation have never had any real serious doubt of always been happy with it, but people told me early on when you have doubts. I don't act right away. You sort of weight sleep on okay get advice talk to people and then work through it and saw.
Always been happy with my vocation. I've always felt this is the right thing. I made the right choice, even though people told me I was too young and one of your questions and here ask about that. Yeah. I joined when I was a sophomore in high school, I went to the brothers prep school. I went to the brothers School Mobile as a freshman.
And one of my freshman religion teacher asked me when are you going to join? You talk about well, he meant what are you going to transfer to the prep school, which was on mobile Bay [00:22:00] across the Bacon mobile and Daphne. So I sophomore year I did. I made that transfer and I loved it. I mean it was a great little school right on the days go swimming almost everyday raise chickens play baseball every day basketball Sports Smalls.
36 about 36 kids altogether grades 9 through 12. We had six in our graduating class. We all finished in the top 10 and we still get together regularly. So these are lifelong friends. So it was a great experience and that was sort of preparation room. Preparation for the religious life and then after I graduated I decided to join the brothers officially to the novitiate up in New Jersey.
Yeah getting back to Faith and doubts their normal that are [00:23:00] natural and I'd be more concerned for people who never have any doubts. some. Your age have doubts after graduation and they move out a home. They may stop going to church for a little while soon as. Children are back. They want their children baptized and they going to follow the faith.
They've inherited lived with just a natural thing. So we ask for Faith. It's a gift you can't burn it. And you can't reason it out. That's what makes it so difficult. We want answers and you can't figure it out because they're on the Lancers of there are that will then it's no longer. But I decided a long time ago if I can believe in the resurrection ski thing.
Walking, I believe in anything else you believe that one here. [00:24:00] What did you do after hearing about the September 11th Terror attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon not much. I remember when I first. I heard about it. I was working in my office was in Bay st. Louis. It was a little bit scary, but I decided I'm not going to let terrorism rube my life.
I was scheduled to fly to Albuquerque few days later with one of the brothers. Well, he said he wasn't getting on a plane he drove up. That's a hundred on this been the safest has ever been, you know our security I mean. Know what security is. I mean, I've been to South Africa. That's security Israelis have a soon as you get to the passport airport.
They take your passport in a secure Zone. They have dogs. They're watching. Okay. I mean, that's security. All right, our security is very [00:25:00] relaxing. Anyway, I wasn't afraid of flying at all. So I said I'm going to live my life. Logan will then the possibility of another attack change what I'm doing because then the terrorists went.
Can you tell us a story about consuming the blood drink? I don't know what that refers to the blood come missile. Savio ugly told us that at one point there was like a weird ritual and they give you like a cup of oh maybe. Kava, like the colour chop up. The sound was not blood drink though. That's a narcotic treat mild narcotic drink in the South Pacific on the islands of New Caledonia Tata.
It's a drink with the kids used to chew the. Of this drink of this kava plant. and then they would drip water over the [00:26:00] roots and catch the water coconut oil and it'd be like look like muddy water dirty water and tastes like dirty water too and you drink it and you can sort of feel. Going down like when you get a novocaine shot, you know how it's out of numbs your mouth but you sort of feel it all the way down loving that.
So it has a very calming effect says it's a mild narcotic and the men in this Village on Tontitown. I was a small island in the Pacific. It's about two miles wide about three four miles long and the natives. Drink this every every evening the men gather under a banyan tree region or banyan tree is where the roots are exposed.
Like they come down forms, like a canopy. It's like walking into a church almost other Cathedral well every night they would drink this and they invited me to [00:27:00] join them, which I thought was pretty nice because it is almost the ritual. Well the principal of the school invited me. His hair grace before we drink the Kaaba thanking God for the Kaaba and asking God to bless all the poor people in the world who don't have any kava to drink that night.
Well people on this island for that will mean it's all relative. Okay, they had no running water. They had no electricity. They had the clothes on their back. I mean, but they were they were happy they get up with some. They go to bed at Sunset basically, so the men would gather every night and talk about matters whether the village if there was any business and then drank the Cava and then wander off to their Hut where the wife had prepared supper.
So it was an honor to go there and heartache, they gave me a. Plant, but I knew I wasn't going to be able to bring that back [00:28:00] on the airline back to Rome all these little Villages would yo to was like a ritual or protocol where we would line up and the chief and his counsel would line up we walk toward each other and we were like the on organic.
So they would give us a little gift usually be a would charge staff or maybe the new year which was a cloth that they wear one time. I look across on the guy across from me has this live chicken I'm saying. Oh, I hope he doesn't give me the check. Well sure now I get the check. Well, the legs were tied with grass will soon as he hands me the chicken.
It's let's picking on my arm. Well, I couldn't let it go because that would be too. So we had chicken for supper that. Yeah, I really enjoyed those visits to some of the South Pacific areas beautiful area in the world. People were not spoiled by [00:29:00] affluence. The young people for the Feast of the Sacred Heart one school they gave the kids and orange.
I mean, this is a big gift to gotta an orange they wear. I don't know what it mean. Like one of them had Boston Celtics had no idea where Boston was. I didn't know what the Celtics were. They you know basketball team. I mean all that's formed from but they just like English and they liked our music.
They like Michael Jackson who was a start
time they repay him that Madonna.
What are your favorite things to do while you're not at school? Let's go favorite things. I do a lot of stuff on a lot of schools around the house. I'll do a lot of the maintenance of house. But my favorite things would be I guess the gardening work. I like to grow flowers. Take pictures of me [00:30:00] make cards lot of that.
In the afternoon, I used to walk around the block until my ankle gave out right now. It's still bad. Some do bicycling. Sometimes do a lot of the grocery shopping that got the menus.
Because most of my time not at school, but I'll read it. Time. Okay. Listen LSU baseball right now and watching on TV baseball fan support.
Do those things work in the garden outside?
What country would you want to visit that you have? Not already? Probably Jerusalem all my travels. I never got to the Holy Land. So that would be pretty high on my list.
Tahiti would be good French [00:31:00] Polynesia, I was scheduled to go there and it didn't work out at the last minute. I was going to go there and make the Tour all the way around the world which also was going to include Hawaii which is one of the three states I've never been to so I still want to get to Hawaii.
It's not country. But Hawaii and Alaska or on my bucket list the other one North Dakota. That's okay. I've been to all the other states I can skip heart Dakota, but I would like to. To Alaska and Hawaii, but in terms of a country, I would say probably Jerusalem. What
is one motivation for young men to join the brothers? And what would be a part of it? What would the end like a part of her to join the workers when you're young for me?
I guess the joy. It's [00:32:00] a joyful life. It's a happy life. I mean, I have no regrets. Whatever.
All the times we focus on what we give up in terms of family and and sex and money and power and all that. But the gospel certainly been true for me with a hundredfold never would have traveled as much as I have. Pat probably had I not been a brother. What 26 countries no station in Rome? So? That kind of travel is exciting and adventuresome, but it's also fulfilling and me.
People so I found it to be a very meaningful life full of joy. It's the Christian Paradox where you give up your freedom, but you're free to do the will of God and it's like love God and do what you want. It's not find a lot of freedom in it. And it's a [00:33:00] meaningful life If Ever I would reach the point where I'd say, this is no longer my.
Location while I would feel free to leave but I feel God is calling me not just once it's not a one-time deal. It's an ongoing deal with you make that commitment. So I think the perks well have job security. They're going to have to worry about a job. It's brotherly used to say the retirement benefits are out of this world.
So three meals a day. I guarantee, you know have those worries. So there's a lot of just natural benefits when I was going to college. I was thinking like 23 hours. The brothers are paying for all this. I didn't have to worry about getting this a job or anything like that at all. All I had to do is go to school.
I mean that was pretty good. So those are perks I guess job Security [00:34:00] Financial Security take about poverty. Hey, but I think there's nothing I want. Her need I mean because I'm going to live a simple lifestyle. I don't need the latest iPhone as soon as it comes out. I don't need that. I don't want it because that would interfere with my lifestyle.
So religiously. Fits my lifestyle. All right, what I would want to do, I think even if I were not a brother, I was still live a simple lifestyle because that's sort of who I am. It's what I'm called to do to be that's my Essence I guess so. So the perks job Securities Vaughn health benefits Amina taking care of.
I mean, you know now that doesn't mean I'm just a sponge on the brothers I Mena I take care of a lot of other people in the process, [00:35:00] but I'm happy. I think that's the biggest thing that happiness and fulfillment because I'm doing what I feel I'm called to do and so my life has meaning. so that that in itself is a perk.
All right. Now that mean is not. And conflict as conflict. Yeah. All right, we go to workshops. We have a opportunity for education and other people don't have I mean opportunity for retreat every year. I get a one week off for retreat my sisters would love to have a week off or treat. I mean, you know, so these are some of.
The part A lot of people look on. Oh, you got to spend a whole week later prequel. Yeah. Well, I want to have a you know, so I get a vacation I go visit my sister from New Jersey. Okay, so there's. Benefits of hurt [00:36:00] the excitement of it a lot of people say well teaching skills. Certainly not exciting.
Well, then why you look at it? I teach school could all up like teaching schools a passion for. That is not everybody's passion. But if if I were not teaching school, I could be working like a toe doing doorbell Ministry like Village on theater go to a Batangas Africa be happy there. I'd be happy anywhere everywhere.
I've been with a brother. Happy and I felt fit him. I fit in I know what to expect. I'm very adaptable. I can eat any kind of food whether it could be a problem. I would not want to live in Canada where it's really cold the heat done. The African people. I don't think I could take Canada very long.
Bring the Bell just run [00:37:00] so concluded

